Playground docs (#417)
returntocorp/semgrep-docs: docs/playground.md

---
slug: playground
append_help_link: true
title: Semgrep Playground
description: "Semgrep Playground is a beginner-friendly environment for creating your first rules."
hide_title: true

---

import MoreHelp from "/src/components/MoreHelp"

# Creating rules with Semgrep Playground

Semgrep Playground is a live editor used to create and test rule patterns on sample code. By testing the pattern out on sample code, you are able to quickly assess the purpose, utility, and speed of a rule as well as save it for later refinement, reuse, or for sharing.

## Creating a rule

There are two ways to create a rule:

* **Simple view.** The simple view is best for quick and simple pattern-matching use cases, but does not display all of Semgrep's operators.
* **Advanced view.** The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.

> ### Using simple view

Author: When I think of the main user story for the simple view, it's to explore Semgrep's language (through its pattern operators and language fields) because the simple view shows the possible values through a drop down box. 

How about:
"Exploring pattern operators and syntax through simple view"
"Learning Semgrep basics through simple view" might be more succinct?

> ### Using simple view

Reviewer: @s-santillan I like "Learning Semgrep basics through simple view". You can even use: "Understanding Semgrep basics through simple view". :-) But if the sole purpose is mostly for the easy start with Semgrep rules, feel free to use learning. :-)

> ### Using simple view

Author: Added in latest update :)

> Simple view provides the** most common pattern-matching operators in Semgrep**. This view is used by default.

Author: I notice that the conversion from gdocs to md results in this weirdness. I'll be more careful next time.

![Screenshot of default playground view](img/playground.png "Default playground view")

> The following **keys** are **supported** in Simple View:

Author: Yup. I have added a short statement "These keys appear as drop-down boxes."

* `language`
* `pattern`
* `pattern-either`
* `pattern-inside`
* `pattern-not`
* `pattern-not-inside`
* `pattern-regex`
* `message`
* `autofix`

The following **metadata keys** are **supported** in simple view:

* `category`
* `technology`
* `source-rule-url`

The simple view has the following limitations:

> * It supports only **one language** per rule.

Author: Adam, it's totally ok to ask questions related to the product 👍  I had these same questions too. 

In the full schema — you can have more than one. This is usually applied to Javascript & Typescript rules (Typescript being a "superset" of JS). I foresee that related languages that may be supported in the future will make more use of this (Clojure, Lisp maybe?)

* It does **not** have support for the following operators: 
    * `pattern-not-regex`
    * `metavariable-regex`
    * `metavariable-pattern`
    * `metavariable-comparison`
* It does **not** support the following experimental features:
    * Join mode
    * Taint mode

To **create a rule** in simple view:

1. Ensure that you are in simple view:
![Screenshot of simple view](img/playground-simple-view.png "Playground simple view")
2. Click **File > New** to start from a blank slate.
3. Select a language from the **language is **drop-down box. This refers to the language that the test code is written in.

> 4. Enter the pattern to test for after the **code is** button.

Author: After some thought, I think "pattern to match" is the clearest. I will include it in the next commit :)

5. **Optional:** Click on the **plus **button to add fields for additional operators. Select the pattern operator and enter the pattern.
6. **Optional:** Click on **Rule metadata** to enter additional metadata fields.

### Using advanced view

The advanced view is a YAML editor for writing a rule **using any valid key from the Semgrep [schema](../writing-rules/rule-syntax/)**. It provides default values for the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule definition and expects the user to modify and add keys to finish the rule.

To create a rule in the advanced view:

1. Ensure that you're in **Advanced view**.

![Screenshot of advanced view](img/playground-advanced-view.png "Playground advanced view")

2. Enter the keys and values needed to finish your rule.

## Running and testing a rule

To **run a rule**: 

1. Enter your own code snippet or use samples from the Playground.
2. **Optional:** Use the `develop` branch docker image by clicking **Tools > Use develop docker image**. This docker image contains the latest code pushed to Semgrep's repository, including experimental features. 

> 3. Press **Run** or **Ctrl+Enter**.

Author: Regarding our audience's operating systems: https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2021

It looks like Windows is the most popular, so it should be **Ctrl+Enter (**⌘+Enter** on Macs)?

* ``1+`` or ``if $X:`` are not valid patterns because they are not full AST elements.

#### The pattern syntax is invalid

Check your metavariable definitions, and use of operators. Metavariables must be uppercase letters preceded by a dollar sign $, such as `$PAYMENT_OUTPUT` or `$X`. Refer to [Pattern syntax](../writing-rules/pattern-syntax/).

#### The YAML syntax is unparsable in Advanced view

Check for spelling and indentation issues. The key names must match [Semgrep's schema](../writing-rules/rule-syntax/).

#### The rule does not behave as expected or does not find the desired match

File a [bug](https://github.com/returntocorp/semgrep/issues/new?title=semgrep.dev%20bug%20report) or reach out through [Semgrep Community Slack](https://r2c.dev/slack).

### Evaluating a rule's performance

After running Semgrep on the test code, a summary of findings appears under the **Matches** column.

The **Performance **column displays how long it takes in seconds for Semgrep to run your rule. It also displays the following benchmarks:

* Blazing
* Quick
* Decent
* Fair
* Okay
* Slow
* Sluggish

These benchmarks take into account the **visual complexity** of the rule.

> ## Adding a rule to the Rule Board

Author: Addressed this note by adding a 1-sentence definition.

**Adding a rule to the [Rule Board](../semgrep-app/rule-board/)** allows you to quickly set a rule as part of every Semgrep scan. To add a rule to the Rule Board:

1. Ensure that you are logged-in.
2. Click **Add to Rule Board**.
3. Select either the Audit or Block boards depending on the importance of the rule. Matches for rules on the Block board will prevent PR merges within a CI environment.

## Saving and sharing a Semgrep rule

> A rule is saved by either **explicitly naming it** or when it is **assigned a shortcode** for sharing. Rules are **unlisted **by default. This means they do not appear publicly in the Registry[] nor can they be searched for, but are accessible via their sharing URL.

Author: I deeply regret using the markdown converter 😂 I'm so sorry Adam!! And yes again there's my via/through issue. I need to kill that habit.

To explicitly name a rule:

1. Sign into Semgrep.
2. Click the **Untitled rule** box.
3. Enter the name of your rule and press **Save**.

To assign a random shortcode:

1. Click **Share**. This will auto-generate a random shortcode and URL to access the rule.

To retrieve or open a rule:

1. Click **File > Open**
2. Enter the rule's name in the **Filter** search box or scroll to find the rule.
3. Click on the rule. The rule loads into the Playground.

To rename a rule:

1. Sign into Semgrep. 
2. In the Playground, open the rule to rename.
3. Enter a new name and press **Save**. This creates a new rule.
4. Delete the old rule to complete the renaming process.

## Using a rule in CI

Using a rule in your CI pipeline enables you to **run the rule at a certain hook or event**. This allows users to add guardrails against security, style, and general code violations.

Semgrep can be used in the following CI environments:

* GitHub (pre-commit and workflows)
* GitLab
* CircleCI
* AppVeyor
* TravisCI

> **Prerequisites:**

Author: Good point. Makes for a good possible rule too in Semgrep...

1. Ensure that you have sufficient permissions to update your CI environment.

To add your rule to your CI pipeline:

1. Click **Share**.
2. Select the CI environment from the tabs under the header **Use in CI**.
3. Click on the **clipboard icon** on the upper right of the snippet to copy it.
4. Paste the snippet into the **config file** specified above the snippet.
![Screenshot of Playground > CI menu](img/playground-use-ci.png "Playground CI menu")

## Embedding a rule in your site

The **Embedded Playground** is an interactive editor which can be embedded in an external domain or web page such as a blog post. It is a means to display Semgrep's rules in action.

The Embedded Playground has two panes:

* **Rule Pane.** This displays the rule data. The rule must have a **reference **(either a short identifier or saved name) from Semgrep Playground.

> * **Test Code.** This displays the code that the rule will act upon. On the bottom right is the Run button, which will run the rule on the test code.

Reviewer: Use the description list here again, please. :-)

Author: Done. Have added it to latest commit.

---
slug: playground
append_help_link: true
title: Semgrep Playground
description: "Semgrep Playground is a beginner-friendly environment for creating your first rules."
hide_title: true

---

import MoreHelp from "/src/components/MoreHelp"

# Creating rules with Semgrep Playground

Semgrep Playground is a live editor used to create and test rule patterns on sample code. By testing the pattern out on sample code, you are able to quickly assess the purpose, utility, and speed of a rule as well as save it for later refinement, reuse, or for sharing.

## Creating a rule

There are two ways to create a rule:

<dl>
    <dt>Simple view</dt>
    <dd>The simple view is best for quick and simple pattern-matching use cases, but does not display all Semgrep operators.</dd>
    <dt>Advanced view</dt>

>     <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule. To complete the rule, the advanced view requires users to fill in additional keys such as pattern operators or metadata.</dd>
```

This might be slightly easier to read. Do we want to use word key and keys or a parameter and parameters? Not sure if we have to agree upon one now, but might save us additional work. If the word key is used in the app, use key of course. The key has many meanings, see: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en (search for key)
![Screenshot 2022-02-07 at 13 30 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152788436-b074326c-bb96-4f17-ae32-a261ee15876f.jpg)

>     <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule. To complete the rule, the advanced view requires users to fill in additional keys such as pattern operators or metadata.</dd>
```

This might be slightly easier to read. Do we want to use word key and keys or a parameter and parameters? Not sure if we have to agree upon one now, but might save us additional work. If the word key is used in the app, use key of course. The key has many meanings, see: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en (search for key)
![Screenshot 2022-02-07 at 13 30 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152788436-b074326c-bb96-4f17-ae32-a261ee15876f.jpg)

>     <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule. To complete the rule, the advanced view requires users to fill in additional keys such as pattern operators or metadata.</dd>
```

This might be slightly easier to read. Do we want to use word key and keys or a parameter and parameters? Not sure if we have to agree upon one now, but might save us additional work. If the word key is used in the app, use key of course. The key has many meanings, see: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en (search for key)
![Screenshot 2022-02-07 at 13 30 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152788436-b074326c-bb96-4f17-ae32-a261ee15876f.jpg)

>     <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule. To complete the rule, the advanced view requires users to fill in additional keys such as pattern operators or metadata.</dd>
```

This might be slightly easier to read. Do we want to use word key and keys or a parameter and parameters? Not sure if we have to agree upon one now, but might save us additional work. If the word key is used in the app, use key of course. The key has many meanings, see: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en (search for key)
![Screenshot 2022-02-07 at 13 30 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152788436-b074326c-bb96-4f17-ae32-a261ee15876f.jpg)

>     <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule and expects users to fill in additional keys, such as pattern operators or metadata, to complete the rule.</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <dd>The advanced view provides the minimum required keys for a Semgrep rule. To complete the rule, the advanced view requires users to fill in additional keys such as pattern operators or metadata.</dd>
```

This might be slightly easier to read. Do we want to use word key and keys or a parameter and parameters? Not sure if we have to agree upon one now, but might save us additional work. If the word key is used in the app, use key of course. The key has many meanings, see: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en (search for key)
![Screenshot 2022-02-07 at 13 30 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152788436-b074326c-bb96-4f17-ae32-a261ee15876f.jpg)

</dl>

> ### Learning Semgrep basics through simple view 

Reviewer: Ok @s-santillan, thank you! :-)

Simple view provides the **most common pattern-matching operators in Semgrep**. This view is used by default.

![Screenshot of default playground view](img/playground.png "Default playground view")

> The following **keys** are **supported** in simple view:

Author: No problem, please feel free to ask :P It's a tricky matter.

Note that I didn't include all the keys for the Advanced view, just as you point out in (1), but I did include these keys in Simple view. This is to better differentiate what is *not* seen or supported in the Simple view, which isn't obvious.

(2) Also -- those keys are *not* the labels in the Playground (pattern-regex, for example is "and matches regex" in the dropdown box). The goal is to make it apparent what the underlying schema is. If the text changes in the UI, it doesn't affect the docs, DRY and all that.

> The following **keys** are **supported** in simple view:

Reviewer: @s-santillan maybe show me later how to use these keys in the editor, or send me some procedure how to use them... :D I did not understand them. But thank you for this explanation, I will not mix them with Playground labels!

* `language`
* `pattern`
* `pattern-either`
* `pattern-inside`
* `pattern-not`
* `pattern-not-inside`
* `pattern-regex`
* `message`
* `autofix`

These keys appear as drop-down boxes.

The following **metadata keys** are **supported** in simple view:

* `category`
* `technology`
* `source-rule-url`

To view these metadata keys, Click **Rule Metadata**.

#### Limitations of simple view
Simple view has the following limitations:

* Supports only **one language** per rule.

* Does **not** include support for the following operators:

    * `pattern-not-regex`
    * `metavariable-regex`
    * `metavariable-pattern`
    * `metavariable-comparison`
* Does **not** support the following experimental features:

    * Join mode
    * Taint mode

To **create a rule** in simple view:

1. Ensure that you are in simple view:
![Screenshot of simple view](img/playground-simple-view.png "Playground simple view")
2. Click **File > New** to start from a blank slate.

> 3. Select a language from the **language is** drop-down box to specify a language in which the test code is written.

Author: **language is** is the name of the label of the drop-down box. So it's like s aying "Select a language from the **language** drop-down box, but the label includes the "is" in it. Mayhaps this is a product copy writing issue. 

Leaving it as is.

> 3. Select a language from the **language is** drop-down box to specify a language in which the test code is written.

Reviewer: Ah, you are right, I think I made a mistake... should have read more carefully.

> 4. Enter the pattern to test for after the **code is** button.

Author: Okay, noted on the structure for procedures! I learn something new every review.

> 4. Enter the pattern to test for after the **code is** button.

Reviewer: I love to teach and help people and like to be taught and educated by others all the time. :-) @s-santillan

100-line and 1000-line files are from random from GitHub open source projects.

**Testing a rule** ensures that it meets your standards for precision and speed. Aside from running a rule in the Playground, it is possible to test a rule by creating comment annotations for intended and unintended matches. You can achieve this by creating a test file.

Refer to [Testing rules](../writing-rules/testing-rules) for the syntax and method to run test files.

### Debugging errors when creating a rule

Common errors are syntax or match issues.

#### The pattern can't be parsed for the language

Check that the **Language is** value and **Test code** language match. Use full AST elements for the language. For example:

* In Java, Python's ``print`` command is not a valid element.
* ``1+`` or ``if $X:`` are not valid patterns because they are not full AST elements.

#### The pattern syntax is invalid

Check your metavariable definitions, and use of operators. Metavariables must be uppercase letters preceded by a dollar sign $, such as `$PAYMENT_OUTPUT` or `$X`. Refer to [Pattern syntax](../writing-rules/pattern-syntax/).

> #### The YAML syntax is unparsable in Advanced view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The YAML syntax is unparsable in the Advanced view
```

#### The pattern syntax is invalid

Check your metavariable definitions, and use of operators. Metavariables must be uppercase letters preceded by a dollar sign $, such as `$PAYMENT_OUTPUT` or `$X`. Refer to [Pattern syntax](../writing-rules/pattern-syntax/).

#### The YAML syntax is unparsable in Advanced view

Check for spelling and indentation issues. The key names must match [Semgrep's schema](../writing-rules/rule-syntax/).

#### The rule does not behave as expected or does not find the desired match

File a [bug](https://github.com/returntocorp/semgrep/issues/new?title=semgrep.dev%20bug%20report) or reach out through [Semgrep Community Slack](https://r2c.dev/slack).

### Evaluating a rule's performance

After running Semgrep on the test code, a summary of findings appears under the **Matches** column.

The **Performance **column displays how long it takes in seconds for Semgrep to run your rule. It also displays the following benchmarks:

* Blazing
* Quick
* Decent
* Fair
* Okay
* Slow
* Sluggish

These benchmarks take into account the **visual complexity** of the rule.

## Adding a rule to the Rule Board

> The [Rule Board](../semgrep-app/rule-board/) displays rules that Semgrep App uses to scan your project's code. Adding a rule to the Rule Board allows you to quickly set a rule as part of every Semgrep scan.

Reviewer: I have noticed this description in the old newsletter. So this means we can drag and drop things etc.? Maybe we can mention it. So Rule Board is essentially a live kanban board for rules? :-) @s-santillan 
![Screenshot 2022-02-04 at 13 36 42](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26669307/152530202-dfd226d7-d5e6-4c67-b54d-b45c69f1bbec.jpg)

Author: Updated description in latest commit! :) Thanks for the catch.
